Title: The Stellar Cinematography of Shin Ultraman

----

Coverimage: - shin-ultraman_cover.jpg

----

Date: 2022-04-17 00:00:00

----

Author: 

----

Tags: 

----

Category: movies

----

Text:

*Shin Ultraman* is my most anticipated film of 2022, and it's not just because I have nostalgia for the franchise, or that I'm doubly excited to see a new feature from Gainax luminaries, Hideaki Anno and Shinji Higuchi. It's even simpler than that. I'm absolutely in love with the visual style of the film! It does such a fantastic job reconciling the iconic old school visuals of Ultraman with ultra slick modern production methods, all without losing an ounce of charm of the source material. The film also has a stellar sense of scale. The result is something truly fresh and unique and I can't wait to see the full film!

For the moment all I have to go on is the trailer. So let's dive into it--but first, a quick history lesson!

###What is Ultraman?
Ultraman (ウルトラマン)  is a cornerstone of Japanese superhero media. "Ultraman" is the name of the main character, an alien who merges with a human and protects Earth from invading monsters by growing to gargantuan size and taking them on in hand to hand combat. *Ultraman* is also the title of the show that he stars in, which debuted on Tokyo Broadcasting System on July 17, 1966. The show was a tremendous success and spawned many sequels and spinoffs, collectively called the *Ultra Series*, which continue to this day.

Image:
Fun Fact: technically the first show in the *Ultra Series* was *Ultra Q*, which debuted less than a year before *Ultraman*. It was a sci-fi mystery series about paranormal investigators. Think *X-files*, but decades older, set in Japan and with way more monsters!

*Ultraman* was created as a response to the popularity of Daikaiju films like *Godzilla*, but it was not a mere knockoff. *Ultraman* was created by Eiji Subaraya, "the father of Tokusatsu" who was also the co-creator of Godzilla and instrumental in the development of the Kaiju and Tokusatsu genres. 

(image: Art-Eater_Shin_Ultraman_01_Eiji_Subaraya.jpg)

###What is Tokusatsu? 
The term Tokusatsu (特撮) simply means "special effects" and refers to any live action Japanese productions that are heavy on special FX, especially people in fantastical suits. If you're familiar with that term, it probably immediately calls to mind things like Godzilla, Kamen Rider, Super Sentai (aka "Power Rangers" in the West) and of course Ultraman.

(image explaining meaning of “Tokusatsu”)

This entire genre as we know it was hugely shaped by Eiji Subaraya, who co-created Godzilla and was head of special FX for the original film released in 1954. *Godzilla* was a monstrous success and laid the groundworks for the Tokusatsu (aka "Toku") and Daikaiju (aka "Kaiju") genres as we know them today

(image explaining Kaiju and Daikaiju)

Fun Fact: Stanley Kubrick was seriously looking into hiring Subaraya Productions to handle the special effects for 2001: A Space Odyessey! He was a fan of Tokusatsu, and not ironically. He appreciated how well crafted Tsubaraya’s productions were!

(image explaining how Kubrick was into Tokusatsu and considered hiring Subaraya to do the VFX for 2001)

###What are Kaiju?
In popular culture, the term Kaiju is internationally accepted to refer to films (and also games/comics etc) that center around gigantic monsters. Ultraman is one of the most notable Kaiju franchises. Godzilla is widely accepted as the first kaiju film, but the term has much older roots. 

The term “kaiju” (怪獣) simply means “strange beast” in Japanese, but the first known use of it can be found in an ancient Chinese text, *The Classic of Mountains and Seas* (山海經) one of the most important historical documents when it comes to Chinese mythology. The book is a compilation of information on mythic locations and fantastical beasts, many which would make their way into Japanese lore and eventually popular culture at large today.

###Let's Talk About The Shin Ultraman Trailer
Alright, now let's dig into this trailer and it's FANTASTIC cinematography!

(youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2XK23KGM-eA&ab_channel=%E6%9D%B1%E5%AE%9DMOVIE%E3%83%81%E3%83%A3%E3%83%B3%E3%83%8D%E3%83%AB)

This sequence sums up everything I love about *Shin Ultraman* so far. There is A LOT going on here!
(image: art-eater_shin_ultraman_trailer_analysis_sequence_01.gif)

###Conveying Scale Subconsciously
As the characters gaze skyward, the woman says "that's Ultraman!" indicating his titanic scale. Now look at the camouflage netting in the background. It's draped as if it's following a vanishing point in a 2 point perspective drawing, flowing through the heads of both characters and leading the viewer's eye to the upper righthand corner.

(image: art-eater_shin_ultraman_trailer_analysis_sequence_01_01_look_up_transition_to_arm.gif)

This smoothly transitions to the next shot where Ultraman's gigantic arm fills the screen as it swings towards the camera from the top righthand corner! The arm visually parallels the tarp from the previous shot. Not only is it a smooth transition, but it drives home that his forewarm is at least as big as that screen filling tarp behind the characters! It unconsciously gives you a sense of scale for the next shot, giving you a very clear frame of reference for just how huge Ultraman actually is!

The sense of scale is wonderful! Now let's talk about how the sequence smoothly jumps between very disparate styles of cinematography. 

###A Cinematographic Hamburger of Old & New
First we see a beautiful tracking shot of Ultraman's gigantic arm soaring through the air. This is a very modern style of shot with the shaky cam and very precise blurs. 

The screen flashes brightly and the camera the fixes itself on Ultraman in his iconic pose firing his signature Spacium Beam. This shot could be right out of the original TV show!

Then we cut to this ULTRA WIDE shot of Ultraman in perfect profile as the beam travels all the way across the screen. This strikes me as a very Higuchi/Anno kind of composition. Something you might see in animation, making it even more striking in live action. As the beam travels across this residential landscape it reminds you of the epic scale of the fight (taking place over kilometers not meters) and its human toll. This is such a beautiful intermediary shot leading up to...

This awesome aerial shot as if you were in a hellicopter observing the Ultra Beam travelling forward, starting from a dot in the distance but tearing through the landscape and bearing down on the camera leaving clouds of dark smoke that eventually overtake the entire screen! What a wonderful way to communicate the awesome destructive power of the Ultra Beam!

There is so much intentionality and beauty to the rhythm of these shots and how they flow together. It's like a delicious hamburger in how it combines so many disparate elements into a cohesive whole. 

1. Modern shot with shaky cam (Bun)
2. Interesting CG transition (fixins)
3. Classic shot (meat)
4. Really interesting intermediary long shot (lettuce, ruffage)
5. Complex modern VFX shot (Bun) 

It seamlessly switches from very slick VFX shots that make you feel you're right there in the thick of the action to classic iconic shots that aren't just an homage to the source, but they're just so pleasing to watch and act as a strong anchor for your memory of the film!

###It's a Bird, It's A Plane!
This is an incredibly thoughtful take on the classic "look up there!" shot. 

In most films, this kind of crowd reaction shot tends to be filmed from a high angle emphasizing the crowd itself, with their heads turned up towards towards the upper corner of the screen in unison.

This shot from *Shin Ultraman* breaks away from the standard in several extremely thoughtful ways. First off it’s shot from a low angle, which is traditionally reserved for the reveal of the spectacle itself, but here it’s used on the spectators. There is a fish eye effect, emphasizing the verticality of the shot, and framing these humans as if they were Kaiju, giving you a visual parallel to what they're actually looking at! But rather than making the people feel big, it emphasizes just how high up they're craning their necks.

Now, look at their eyelines. Instead of unanimously looking in one direction, their eyes are fanning and out in different directions. This emphasizies that what they’re looking at is absolutely massive. It’s enveloping their entire field of vision.

The low angle also emphasizes the clear blue sky stretching out into infinity behind the characters. The sun is burning high and bright above them, conveying a sense of vast distance and monumental scale. The light/dark balance is exquisite, with the sun having a subtle pink hue that helps it stand out against the blue sky. It recalls the feeling of blinding sunlight without overpowering the composition. Everything looks and FEELS right.


##Wait, It's Actually A Plane?
This is another shot that plays with scale in a really fascinating way. Ultraman soars through the sky, dwarfed by the skyscrapers below him. This time Ultraman, who we know to be enormous, appears miniscule on screen, emphasizing just how massive cities have become since Ultraman was originally conceived in the 60s. At the same time, Ultraman doesn't feel small himself. The way this scene is composed, it's clear he's flying at about the same size and speed as a jumbo jet (Shin Ultraman is 60m tall while a Boeing 747 is 71m long). Once again, the sense of scale is so thoughtfully conveyed!

##Shooting Humans Like Kaiju
A running motiff of Shin Ultraman seems to be that scenes with important human characters are composed similar to Kaiju battles. Following the shot of Ultraman flying over the city, we see the two main characters hard at work, surrounded by piles of books that recall skyscrapers.

Throughout the trailer we regularly see the human characters up close. Often times a character will be talking to someone in the foreground with their back to the audience, out of focus and taking up nearly the entire screen. Much like the scenes with Kaiju, the camera has to track around these characters to keep track of the action. At the same time, they don’t get overly cute with it. The visual parallels aren’t too on the nose and they have an opposite effect. While the Kaiju scenes feel massive, the scenes with people talking feel more intimate, even claustrophobic at times.

But the visual parallel still stands. These humans might not be titanic in size, but they are just as mighty in will and their actions will be just as consequential as the kaiju battles.

I love this shot here, where the female protagonist is introduced. She kicks down this door the same way the Kaiju might kick down a building! And the sweeping camera and low angle make her seem larger than life.

##The Light In His Eyes
I have a feeling this will be one of the most iconic shots from the film when you see it in context. It’s absolutely gorgeous. Iconic, eerie, compelling. Ultraman’s eyes glow a very particular hue and intensity. A violent fire rages behind him, but his eyes are calm. They shine like the various manmade lights in the scene. Those lights are there to help people see at night. Ultraman’s eyes are filled with the light of the people!

It's also important to note he’s huge, but he doesn’t dwarf the landscape. It’s a bit like seeing the statue of liberty in person. As you approach it from a distance, you think to yourself “oh it’s smaller than I thought.” But as you get closer and closer you realize “no wait, this thing is MASSIVE.

##Eyes Like Starlight
We can compare Ultraman's friendly eyes with this mysterious alien, whose eyes twinkle like stars. The celestial nature of its eyes are emphasized by their contrast against the mundane, manmade office lights behind it.

We see the alien creature again in this comedic shot where it sits in the passenger side of a sedan as they idle in an underpass. The mysterious monster inserted into such a mundane situation is visually delightful. But also notice the reflection of the artificial lights on the car’s hood. Once again, they allow for contrast of a familiar mundane light source vs the mysterious starlight of the alien’s eyes. There’s also the reflection of a cross walk on the hood, perhaps symbolizing the characters being at a crossroads, or making inroads with one another.

----

Uuid: MjEiXExeag7mTmrZ